Fill out the technical section (#2)
midnightntwrk/lfdt-project-proposals: proposals/XXXX-compact.md

---

# HIP Identifier
<mark>**HIP identifier** a short description plus a serial number with a
version.
</mark>

# Sponsor(s)

> - Parisa Ataei (Shielded) [<parisa.ataei@shielded.io>](mailto:parisa.ataei@shielded.io)

Reviewer: I think we should add Thomas Kerber to this list.

The Compact programming language provides a concrete implementation of the [Kachina programming model](https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/kachina-foundations-of-private-smart-contracts/).
Compact is used to implement privacy-preserving smart contracts with these characteristics:

> - contracts are compiled to **off-chain code** that implements the full contract with access to private data;

Reviewer: Line 22: Something bothers me about the phrase "many different privacy-preserving blockchains".  Perhaps "any privacy-preserving blockchain with certain similar characteristics".

Author: It bothered me to write it, I'll adopt your suggestion.

Three important factors influenced Compact's design: it should be safe, familiar, and restricted.

## Safety
The execution of smart contracts can have real-world financial consequences.
The addition of data privacy can also raise issues of legal requirements of data protection on the one hand and data disclosure on the other.
While Compact itself cannot solve these issues, it is intended to make it easy for contract authors to address them.
It is therefore important that it is easy to develop correct smart contracts,
and possible to completely understand their behavior by inspecting their source code.

Compact is statically typed to help enforce correctness.
The language has a very clear distinction between private data (called "witnesses" in Compact) and public data (called the "ledger" in Compact).
The language's implementation tracks private data and requires it to be explicitly disclosed by the developer before allowing it to be publicly observed.
Failure to explicitly disclose such private data is a compilation error, preventing the contract from ever being executed.

## Familiarity
Compact is intended to be familiar to most developers.

> Its syntax is based on TypeScript, which in turn is based on JavaScript, Java, and ultimately C and C++.

Reviewer: It might be worth mentioning that Compact has a stronger type system than TypeScript, with no `any` type, casts that are checked at run time rather than simply trusted, and run-time type checks at the entry points from external code.

> Witness implementations are intended to be provided in some general purpose programming language, which can be called from Compact programs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Witness implementations are intended to be provided in some foreign general purpose programming language, which can be called from Compact programs.
```

Reviewer 2: I made this suggestion and the next one to link these three paragraphs to each other more.

> An off-chain implementation of a Compact contract consists of the contract's implementation itself, along with some implementation of the witnesses that it uses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An off-chain implementation of a Compact contract consists of the contract's implementation itself in Compact, along with some implementation of the witnesses that it uses in a foreign general purpose language.
```

The mapping from witnesses' Compact type signatures to foreign language type signatures is predictable and will be well specified for each supported foreign language.

In the specific instantiation of Compact for the Midnight Network, witnesses have TypeScript foreign type signatures and they can be implemented in either TypeScript or JavaScript.
However, the intention is that other foreign languages can be equally well supported.

## Ledger ADTs
The public on-chain state of a Compact contract is its so-called "ledger".
Compact supports a number of builtin abstract data types (ADTs) for the ledger.
Examples include cells containing a Compact value, integer counters, sets of Compact values, maps whose keys and values are Compact values, etc.

> The specific instantiation of Compact for the Midnight Network has specific builtin ledger ADTs.

Reviewer: Ledger ADTs are defined separately from the compiler; thus the set of ledger ADTs is easily customized without knowledge of or changes to the compiler.

However, the design is general enough to allow other ADTs to be provided.

## The Compact Standard Library
Compact has a standard library which provides utilities that are generally useful in smart contracts.
Notable among these are cryptographic primitives such as hashing and elliptic curve arithmetic.
The ledger ADTs are also implemented by the standard library.

The standard library is extensible by the Compact implementers.

## Developer Tools (the Compact SDK)
The Compact project includes utilities for Compact contract development.
These tools are uniformly invoked using the `compact` command-line program.
This is similar to the way that the `git` command-line program provides uniform access to a large number of subcommands.
The implementation of the command line driver is in Rust and is part of the Compact open-source project.

There are currently a number of subcommands such as:

- `install` and `upgrade` to manage versions of the compiler and related tooling

> - `compile` to compile Compact contracts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `compile` to compile a Compact contract
```

- `format` to invoke the official Compact source-code formatter

> - `fixup` to make safe automatic repairs to contracts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `fixup` to make safe automatic repairs to a Compact contract
```

> The design of the SDK tooling is intended for flexibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The design of the SDK tooling focuses on flexibility.
```

Reviewer 2: Can't decide which one I like better...

Author: I'll adopt your suggestion.  It's not the design that is flexible, it's the tooling, so yours is better.

Subcommands can potentially be implemented in any other language (e.g., Python, shell scripts, etc.) and they could be provided by third parties.

## The Compiler Implementation

> The Compact open-source project provides an official implementation of the Compact programming language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Compact open-source project provides a reference implementation of the Compact programming language for Midnight Network.
```

Author: I think it's subtly different.

A reference implementation (to me) is intended to explain and illustrate the semantics and to be readable to someone who wants to create other implementations.

An official implementation is the one that is supported by the project (the situation is like the CPython implementation for Python, the official implementation of the Python Software Foundation).  Any others are third party and use at your own risk.

> This implementation is a compiler implemented in the Scheme programming language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This compiler is implemented in the Scheme programming language.
```

Scheme is used, primarily, in order to use the [Nanopass compiler framework](https://nanopass.org/documentation.html) ([GitHub](https://github.com/nanopass)).
Nanopass is a framework intended to easily and correctly develop commercial-quality compilers.

> While we would not say that the barrier to entry for contributing to the Compact compiler is exactly "low",

Reviewer: We might want to mention the extensive test suite with essentially full coverage of the compiler (excluding self-diagnostics), which helps developers catch unintended changes before they are released.

Nanopass compilers do have a pleasant characteristic of being quite understandable once one learns the framework.

> The compiler is structured as a number of compiler passes that each individually make a small transformation on an internal intermediate representation (IR).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The compiler is structured as a number of compiler passes that each individually make a small transformation on an intermediate representation (IR).
```

Each compiler pass is implemented as a sequence of rewrite rules that pattern matches on the input IR and generates the output IR.

The current implementation of the compiler supports the Midnight Network as the underlying blockchain.
Midnight uses a BLS-based proof system.
Together, we will refer to the underlying blockchain and proof system as the "backend".

> The architecture of the Compact compiler is intended to support a different backends.

Reviewer: "a different" => "different"

and a backend-specific implementation of the on-chain code to be deployed in a contract or else submitted in a transaction, depending on how the backend blockchain works.

## Open Language Design
The open-source Compact repository will host language feature design documents.
The Midnight Network has a process for proposing changes called the Midnight Improvement Proposal (MIP) process.
The Compact project will use this process or a suitable variation of it to conduct language feature design in the open,
and to allow community-driven language feature design.

An example of a similar process being used successfully for programming languages can be found in the Python language community's
[Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP)](https://peps.python.org/) process.

<mark>**Effort and resources** committed (coders and any other resources that are needed) and timeline.
</mark>

# How To
<mark>**How to**: How to host and test the project.
How to deploy and use.
How does one know that it works.
</mark>

# References
<mark>**References**. See [citation guide](http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html).
</mark>

> TODO, suggestions:

Reviewer 2: Personally I think referencing Chez Scheme, Nanopass framework, and the long Kachina paper makes sense. We could even specify that Compactc is implemented in Chez Scheme.

These criteria are organized by the major deliverables and goals of the project.

1. **Language Specification and Documentation**

   The goal is to have a clear, unambiguous, and complete definition of the language that can be used by developers, auditors, and implementers.

   1. **Language Reference Completeness:** The informal Compact Language Reference document fully describes 100% of the language features implemented in the compiler and used in the Standard Library.
      There are no compiler features that lack corresponding documentation.

   1. **Specification Consistency:** An external review by at least two developers (not on the core Compact team) confirms they can build a functionally equivalent "hello world" style contract using only the Language Reference, with no ambiguities found.

   1. **Standard Library Documentation:** Every function and module in the Compact Standard Library is documented with its type signature, purpose, parameters, and a usage example.
1. **Compiler and Software Development Kit (SDK)**

   The goal is to provide a robust, correct, and usable compiler and set of tools for developers.

>    1. **Compiler Correctness and Test Coverage:** The compiler's test suite achieves a minimum of 90% code coverage.

Reviewer: We're currently at 88% and there isn't much more we can pick by feeding the compiler Compact programs.  There is a lot of unreachable code in the three downstream type-checking passes that we can only test if we feed them bogus intermediate-language programs.  I'd rather not do that.  Perhaps say the goal is 90% excluding self-diagnostic code that is exercised only when the compiler itself is broken.

>    1. **Compiler Correctness and Test Coverage:** The compiler's test suite achieves a minimum of 90% code coverage.

Reviewer 2: We should specify that this is coverage for the source language (Compact) and not generated backend languages (like ZKIR and JS). We can also add a goal for coverage of generated backend languages.
